#+TITLE: SPAN Flow Models Implemented in ARIES
#+AUTHOR: Gary W. Johnson
#+EMAIL: gjohnson@green-compass.org
#+TEXT: Copyright 2012 Gary W. Johnson

* Overview

In this document, we describe eight implementations of the Service
Path Attribution Networks framework, one per ecosystem service
currently modeled by the ARIES system. Each one is given up to three
matrices with the same numbers of rows and columns, which represent
the continuous, spatial distribution of three variables -- source,
sink, and use values, described below -- over the same geographic
extent. These represent features relevant to the type of ecosystem
service-specific matter, energy, or information -- called the service
medium -- whose movement through space is the purpose of the given
SPAN implementation.

The first matrix shows the distribution of the service medium's
*source*. That is, each cell in the matrix records the amount of the
medium that should be generated by this geospatial location over the
course of the simulation.

The second matrix contains the distribution of the landscape's
absorption capacity with respect to the service medium in the same
units as the source matrix. We call these values the ecosystem service
*sink*. Sinks exist for many but not all services, so the sink matrix
will not exist in some instances.

The third matrix depicts the distribution of human populations or
assets that are likely to be affected, for better or worse, by
interaction with the service medium and may be either represented as a
simple binary presence/absence matrix or with a varying demand value
per cell in the same units as the source matrix. This matrix is called
the ecosystem service *use*. In the event that the service medium is
beneficial to people (e.g., drinking water, pollen for crops, scenic
views, i.e., "provisioning services"), *use* locations can be seen as
potential beneficiaries of an ecosystem good or service. If the
service medium is detrimental to people (e.g., floodwater, wildfire,
storm surges, i.e., "preventive services"), *use* locations will
represent populations or assets that are potentially vulnerable to an
ecosystem-generated threat.

At the start of each SPAN simulation, one service carrier object is
created in each source location with an initial weight equal to the
value in the source matrix at that location (a density) times the area
of that cell, so that each service carrier moves a volume around the
matrix.

In order to determine each carrier's path through the matrix, each of
the eight models below may need additional matrices for
topography-related variables. For example, the water supply, sediment
transport, and flood prevention models all require matrices containing
the spatial distribution of elevation and hydrologic networks. Which
variables are needed for service carrier routing varies from model to
model and will be described in each of the sections below as needed.

Over the course of each simulation, these carriers will move from cell
to cell through the matrix space, until either they become stuck in
one cell permanently, they move beyond the bounds of the matrix's
edges, or their weight falls below the *transition threshold*. This
value, given in the same units as the *source* matrix, is the minimum
amount of the service medium that the model user is interested in
keeping track of. Thus, any service carriers with weights below this
value are moving an insignificantly small amount of the medium around
and will be disregarded by the simulation from there on.

Whenever a carrier encounters a *sink* location, it will give up some
of its weight to that *sink* based on the absorption capacity still
remaining in the cell at that point in the simulation. After this new
absorption, the remaining *sink* value will be reduced by the carrier
weight absorbed.

Whenever a carrier encounters a *use* location, a new carrier is
stored in that cell, containing the entire route taken from the
original *source* cell as well as a list of all the *sinks*
encountered along this path and the amount of the carrier's weight
that was absorbed by each of them. Finally, this stored carrier is
given a weight, representing the amount of the service medium that
affects this location for good or ill.

If the use process is destructive (i.e., typically rival use, such as
water taken from streams to drink, thereby reducing the amount of
downstream water available), then the stored carrier's weight will be
equal to the remaining *use* value in this location. As with *sink*
locations, this *use* value will be reduced by the weight captured
from the service carrier in this step. Similarly, the moving service
carrier's weight is reduced by the stored amount prior to moving on to
the next cell in the matrix.

If the use process is non-destructive (e.g., floodwater encounters one
*use* location, damages its assets, and continues on to cause damage
to other *use* locations without the service carrier losing water to
these encounters), then the stored carrier's weight will be equal to
the full remaining weight of the moving service carrier. This carrier
will then move on to the next cell in the matrix without losing any of
the weight with which it entered the *use* location.

The SPAN simulation may be considered complete once all the moving
service carriers have been terminated according to the conditions set
forth above. At this point, all of the stored carriers are collected
from the *use* locations and passed to a set of sixteen
post-simulation analysis functions. Each of these functions produces a
new matrix, containing the spatial distribution of one of the
following variables:

|-----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------|
| Component | Specifier    | Relation to Service Medium                         |
|-----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------|
| Source    | Theoretical  | Expected production at origin                      |
| Source    | Actual       | Amount produced which reaches a use location       |
| Source    | Possible     | Same as Actual Source but excludes sink effects    |
| Source    | Inaccessible | Difference between Theoretical and Possible Source |
| Source    | Blocked      | Difference between Possible and Actual Source      |
|-----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------|
| Sink      | Theoretical  | Expected absorption capacity at origin             |
| Sink      | Actual       | Amount absorbed along simulated flow paths         |
| Sink      | Inaccessible | Difference between Theoretical and Actual Sink     |
|-----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------|
| Use       | Theoretical  | Expected demand/vulnerability at origin            |
| Use       | Actual       | Amount received along simulated flow paths         |
| Use       | Possible     | Same as Actual Use but excludes sink effects       |
| Use       | Inaccessible | Difference between Theoretical and Possible Use    |
| Use       | Blocked      | Difference between Possible and Actual Use         |
|-----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------|
| Flow      | Actual       | Amount delivered to a use location                 |
| Flow      | Possible     | Same as Actual Flow but excludes sink effects      |
| Flow      | Blocked      | Difference between Possible and Actual Flow        |
|-----------+--------------+----------------------------------------------------|

These values are given as densities in their respective matrices so as
to be commensurate with the original input *source*, *sink*, and *use*
matrices.

In order to run in conditions of data scarcity, all of the SPAN
implementations below were created to accept input matrices with
either deterministic values or probability distributions per cell,
depending on the quality and completeness of the input data set. For
all ecosystem services but carbon sequestration and storage, the SPAN
model uses variance propagation to transmit the input uncertainties
through to the outputs. In the special case of carbon, in which all
*source* locations are connected to all *use* locations, the SPAN
model uses a Monte Carlo simulation approach.

* Carbon Sequestration and Storage
** Overview

The carbon SPAN model assesses the amount of carbon sequestration in
tons per hectare per year available to offset anthropogenic carbon
emissions produced within the same region. Before being distributed to
use locations, this sequestration value is first reduced by
landscape-generated carbon emissions (e.g., release of stored carbon
due to fire or deforestation). Because all source locations (carbon
sequestering ecosystems) are connected to all sink locations (carbon
emitting ecosystems) and all use locations (human carbon emitters) by
means of atmospheric gas mixing, the standard SPAN approach of
tracking routes across landscapes from source to use locations does
not apply to this ecosystem service. Instead, the algorithm simply
distributes the source value from each matrix cell among the use
locations based on their relative emissions values. Before being
assigned to these use cells, each source value is depleted by each
sink location, again based on its relative sink value.

** Procedure

1. The model first computes the number of hectares per cell for
   sources, sinks, and users given cell-width and cell-height in
   meters. This value multiplied by the densities (tons of CO2 per
   hectare) in each cell of the source, sink, and use matrices
   calculates the tons of CO2 sequestered, released, or emitted per
   cell.

2. Next, the user selects a number of iterations for the Monte Carlo
   simulation and draws this many sample worlds (e.g., one sample
   matrix each for source, sink, and use) by drawing sample values
   from the probability distributions in each of the matrix cells.

3. For each such sample world, the model:

   1. Calculates the total source, sink, and use values by summing
      across all cells in each matrix.

   2. Determines the total amount each source cell loses to all the
      sinks by multiplying each source value by the total sink divided
      by the total source. If the total sink is greater than the total
      source (i.e., there are more landscape emissions than
      sequestration), then every source cell simply loses all of its
      value to the sinks. Subtracting this result from the source
      value per cell gives the source amount remaining, which can be
      contributed to users (i.e., used to offset anthropogenic
      emissions). This can be called the *unsunk source* value.

   3. Computes the total amount each sink reduces all the sources by
      multiplying each sink value by the total source divided by the
      total sink. If the total source is greater than the total sink,
      then the amount sunk by every sink cell is simply its sink
      value. This is the *actual sink* value.

   4. Computes the total amount each user receives from all the
      sources by multiplying each use value by the total source
      divided by the total use. If the total source is greater than
      the total use, then the amount received by every use cell is
      simply its use value. This is the *possible use* value.

   5. Repeats step 4 above but replaces the source values with the
      unsunk source values from step 2. This computes the *actual use*
      value.

   6. Normalizes all source and use values between [0-1] by dividing
      by their totals.

   7. Pairs every source cell with every sink cell, and for each such
      pair, multiplies the normalized source value by the actual sink
      value. This calculates the amount each source cell loses to each
      sink cell.

   8. Pairs every source cell with every use cell, and for each such
      pair, multiplies the normalized source value by the possible use
      value. This calculates the possible amount each source cell
      contributes to each use cell.

   9. Pairs every source cell with every use cell, and for each such
      pair, multiplies the normalized source value by the actual use
      value. This calculates the actual amount each source cell
      contributes to each use cell.

   10. For each triplet combination of source, sink, and use cells,
       multiplies the normalized source value by the normalized use
       value and then by the actual sink value to compute the effect
       of each sink on each pair of source and use point.

4. Combines the results of each Monte Carlo iteration from step 3
   above by computing a distribution per use cell of the possible and
   actual service medium amounts received as well as the amounts lost
   to sinks.

5. Finally, divides the possible-weight, actual-weight, and
   sink-effects values by the number of hectares per cell to turn them
   back into densities (tons of CO2 per hectare per year) for
   comparison with the original input layers.

** Outputs

The carbon model produces theoretical, possible, actual, inaccessible,
and blocked carbon sources (sequestration), sinks (stored carbon
release), and uses (anthropogenic emissions). All values are in tons
of CO2 per hectare per year.

Subtracting the total theoretical sink value (summed across all cells
and multiplied by the number of hectares per cell) from the total
theoretical source value (summed across all cells and multiplied by
the number of hectares per cell) calculates the tons of carbon
sequestration per year available for offsetting anthropogenic
emissions. The net carbon balance of the study region can then be
determined by subtracting the total theoretical use value (summed
across all cells and multiplied by the number of hectares per cell)
from this available offset amount.

* Aesthetic Viewsheds
** Overview

The aesthetic viewsheds model in ARIES uses a line-of-sight SPAN model
to quantify view paths between source points (visually valued objects)
and use points (housing), checks for obstructions and sink features
(visual blight), and determines (using a digital elevation model) how
much of the source element can be seen from the use point. The source,
sink, and use layers will typically be outputs of a Bayesian network
model or reclassified input data giving relative values (0-100) for
sources, sinks, or users of visually valued viewsheds. A distance
decay function is applied to the results to compute the visual utility
originating from the source point that reaches each user. Sink
features that can degrade viewsheds are accounted for only if they are
present in the foreground of a user's view of a source location.

** Procedure

For each source point-use point pair, given that the points are not in
the same location (no /in situ/ use occurs), the model:

1. Computes the Euclidean distance in meters between the center of the
   source and use cells.

2. Calculates the source decay at this distance, and proceeds if
   positive (Fig. 1). Otherwise, there is no view service between this
   source and use point pair.

3. Looks up the elevation at every point between the source and use
   locations.

4. Takes the difference in meters between each elevation along this
   view line and the use point's elevation (i.e., computes the rises).

5. Calculates the Euclidean distance in meters between every point
   along this view line and the use location (i.e., computes the runs).

6. Calculates each of the view obstruction slopes along the view line
   by dividing each rise by its corresponding run.

7. Selects the maximum view obstruction slope from these values to be
   the determinant of how much of the source a user can and cannot see
   along this view line.

8. Computes the view elevation in meters projected onto the source by
   multiplying the maximum view obstruction slope by the Euclidean
   distance between the source and use points in meters and adding
   this value to the use elevation.

9. If the projected view elevation is negative (because the view
   obstruction slope was negative), then sets it to 0.

10. If the slope is positive, then the user is looking up. The model
    only counts the visible part of the source value. If the projected
    view elevation is greater than or equal to the source elevation,
    then the user cannot see the source location due to intervening
    obstructions. Therefore the source value along this line of sight
    is 0. If the projected view elevation is less than the source
    elevation, then the user can see some fraction of the source
    location. The model subtracts the projected view elevation from
    the source elevation and divides this difference by the source
    elevation to get a number between 0 and 1, representing the
    visible source fraction. This fraction is then multiplied by the
    total source value to get the visible source value.

11. If the slope is negative, then the user is looking straight ahead
    or down (e.g., looking from a hill down at a lake). If the
    projected view elevation is greater than the source elevation,
    then the user cannot see it, and the visible source value
    is 0. Otherwise, if the projected view elevation is less than or
    equal to the source elevation, then the user can see the entire
    source element. Thus, the model sets the visible source value to
    be the total source value.

12. Finally, multiplies the visible source value by the source decay
    at that user-to-source distance (Fig. 1) to compute the possible
    weight transmitted from the source point to the use point.

13. If the possible weight is below the transition threshold, then
    there is no service along this view line. Otherwise, continues
    with the next step.

14. For each sink location along the sight line, calculates the
    visible sink value using the same algorithm as for the source
    (e.g., projects view elevation onto the sink, multiplies sink value
    by fraction of sink elevation visible above the projected view
    elevation), and finally multiplies the visible sink value by the
    sink decay (Fig. 2) at its distance from the use point.

15. Computes the actual weight as the possible weight minus the sum of
    the sink effects along the sight line. If this value is negative
    (because sinks outweigh the source value), sets the actual weight
    to 0.

16. Stores a carrier on the use point with the possible and actual
    weights computed as described above, the line of sight route
    between the source and use point, and a list of sinks and their
    visual blight impacts on the actual weight value.

file:./source-decay-views.png

Fig 1. Source Decay: Grow from 0% to 100% over first mile. Next,
reduce from 100% to 75% from mile 1 to mile 5. Then, reduce from 75%
to 25% from mile 5 to mile 20. Finally, reduce from 25% to 0% from
mile 20 to mile 60.

file:./sink-decay-views.png

Fig 2. Sink Decay: Reduce from 100% to 75% over first 1/2 mile. Then
reduce from 75% to 0% over the next 1/2 mile.

** Outputs

The line-of-sight model produces theoretical, possible, actual,
inaccessible, and blocked viewshed sources, sinks, uses, and
flows. While the input source, sink, and use data were in relative
values from 0-100, the flow model outputs can have much higher
values. The reason for this is that the service medium moving between
locations is scenic beauty transmitted by light, which is
predominantly informational and is not subject to the laws of
conservation of mass or energy. That is, if many users all have a view
of the same mountain, they can all benefit from this view without
competing with one another.

Therefore, since at best each source location could potentially
provide a fully unobstructed, undecayed view to every user, the
theoretical source matrix contains the input source values (from
0-100) times the number of use locations.

Since each sink could at worst impact every line-of-sight path once,
the theoretical sink matrix contains the input sink values (from
0-100) times the number of line-of-sight paths possible (i.e., the
number of source point-use point pairs).

Finally, since each user could at best have a fully unobstructed,
undecayed view of every source point, the theoretical use map contains
the sum of all the input source values (each from 0-100) assigned
uniformly to every use location.

The most interesting outputs from this model are most likely to be the
possible and actual source, use, and flow matrices as well as the
actual and inaccessible sinks.

One known limitation of this model is that it assumes that the Earth
is flat for the purposes of distance decay calculations. An
improvement to the algorithm that incorporates the effects of the
Earth's curvature on views at a distance is currently under
development.

* Surface Water Supply
** Overview

The surface water SPAN model traces the path taken by runoff downhill
and downstream according to a digital elevation model (DEM) and stream
network data. The source matrix represents the total amount of runoff
in mm per cell expected to be generated in each location over the time
period of the simulation (one year in the initial ARIES release). The
sink matrix contains the expected water absorption capacity of each
cell (e.g., via evapotranspiration and soil infiltration) in mm per
cell. Finally, the use matrix shows the spatial distribution of human
demand for surface water also in mm per cell. As carriers of runoff
move from cell to cell during the simulation, their weight (the
remaining runoff value) will be reduced by encounters with both sinks
and users because the use process (i.e., extracting water from rivers
and streams) reduces the amount available to downstream users in this
case.

** Procedure

1. The model first calculates the number of mm^2 per cell using the
   cell width and cell height in meters and multiplies this by the
   input source, sink, and use values as well as the transition
   threshold to convert them from densities (mm) to volumes (mm^3).

2. Finds the nearest river or stream cell to each user using a
   Euclidean distance metric. In cases of low resolution input data,
   some users may appear to be co-located with river or stream cells,
   in which case this will be considered the nearest one to them.
   Multiple users may share the same nearest river or stream cell.
   This information is meant to identify the locations from which
   users withdraw water from rivers or streams.

3. Places a virtual bucket at each sink point in the landscape, whose
   capacity is the sink volume (in mm^3) at that location. This is
   called the *sink capacity*.

4. Places two virtual buckets at each withdrawal point detected in
   step 2, whose capacities are equal to the sum of all the use
   volumes in their nearest use locations (as determined by step 2).
   One bucket is called the *possible use capacity*, and the other is
   called the *actual use capacity*. The first keeps track of the
   amount of surface water available to users at that location if
   there were no sinks on the landscape, and the second tracks the
   surface water available in the presence of sinks.

5. Creates one runoff service carrier per source cell, and sets its
   initial possible and actual weights to the source volume at that
   location.

6. Moves all of the service carriers one step either downhill (if
   overland) or downstream (if in a river or stream cell). This is a
   two-step process:

   1. If overland and in a sink location whose sink capacity bucket is
      not already full of water from previous carriers, reduces the
      carrier's actual weight by the remaining sink capacity and
      reduces the remaining sink capacity by the amount of water
      absorbed. Records the amount absorbed by this sink in the
      carrier's sink effects list.

      If in a river or stream location that contains a possible or
      actual use capacity bucket that is not already full, reduces the
      carrier's possible weight by the remaining possible use
      capacity, reduces the carrier's actual weight by the remaining
      actual use capacity, and reduces the remaining possible and
      actual use capacities by the respective amounts of water that
      they each absorb. Stores a new runoff carrier on this location
      with possible and actual weight values equal to the amounts of
      water absorbed by this location divided by the mm^2 per cell
      value (to translate them back into densities for comparison with
      the input matrices).

   2. If the runoff carrier's possible weight is greater than the
      transition threshold volume, it moves to the neighboring cell
      with the lowest elevation, excluding the previous cell from
      which the carrier just came (to avoid short infinite cycles due
      to locally flat topography). If more than one neighboring cell
      meets this criteria, selects the one for which the angular
      distance is smallest between the current bearing and that
      required to reach this neighbor. Because this calculation cannot
      be performed on the matrix edges, any carrier which reaches an
      edge cell will be considered to have left the bounds of the
      study area.

7. Repeats step 6 until all service carriers have either gotten
   trapped in a single cell, flowed off the edge of the matrix bounds,
   or lost all of their possible weight to users.

8. Distributes the water captured in all the possible and actual use
   capacity buckets (those placed at stream withdrawal locations) to
   their nearest users (as determined by step 2) according to their
   relative use values. That is, use locations with greater use values
   (i.e., surface water demands) receive correspondingly more of the
   water captured at the stream withdrawal locations.

** Outputs

The surface water model produces theoretical, possible, actual,
inaccessible, and blocked surface water sources, sinks, uses, and
flows. All values are in mm of water per cell per time period of the
simulation (one year in the initial ARIES release).

* Sediment Transport
** Overview

The sediment transport SPAN model traces the path taken by eroded soil
downhill, downstream, and out into floodplains according to a digital
elevation model (DEM) and stream network data. The source matrix
represents the total amount of eroded soil in tons per hectare
expected to be lost from each location over the time period of the
simulation (one year in the initial ARIES release). The sink matrix
contains the expected soil capture capacity of each cell (e.g., via
floodplain deposition) in tons per hectare. Finally, the use matrix
shows the spatial distribution of human populations or assets that
would either benefit from or be harmed by sediment deposition (as
presence/absence values). As carriers of sediment move from cell to
cell during the simulation, their weight (the remaining soil amount
they carry) will be reduced by encounters with sinks (but not users).
Users that are co-located with sinks in floodplains will be affected
by however much sediment is captured by their sink. All other users
will receive no service according to this model.

** Procedure

1. The model first calculates the number of hectares per cell using
   the cell width and cell height in meters and multiplies this by the
   input source, sink, and use values to convert them from densities
   (tons/ha) to volumes (tons).

2. Finds the nearest river or stream cell to each sink in a floodplain
   using a Euclidean distance metric. In cases of low resolution input
   data, some sinks may appear to be co-located with river or stream
   cells, in which case this will be considered the nearest one to
   them. Multiple sinks may share the same nearest river or stream
   cell. If there is a levee between a floodplain sink and its nearest
   river or stream cell, this sink will be considered nullified by the
   levee's water-channeling effect. This information is meant to
   identify the river or stream locations from which sediment emerges
   into floodplains during flooding events, when it can be deposited.

3. Calculates the relative position of each non-levee-blocked
   floodplain sink along a line between its nearest river or stream
   point and the floodplain boundary. This position value is a real
   number between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates the distant floodplain
   boundary and 1 indicates the river or stream point. These values
   are called the *floodplain activation factors* and indicate each
   sink's relative likelihood of sediment deposition within the
   floodplain.

4. Places a virtual bucket at each sink point not in a floodplain,
   whose capacity is the sink volume (in tons of sediment) at that
   location. This is called the *overland sink capacity*.

5. Places a virtual bucket at each sediment deposition point detected
   in step 2, whose capacities are equal to the sum of all the
   non-levee-blocked floodplain sink volumes in their nearest sink
   locations (as determined by step 2) times their respective
   floodplain activation factors (step 3). This is called the
   *floodplain sink capacity*.

6. Creates one sediment service carrier per source cell and sets its
   initial actual weight to the source volume at that location. Its
   possible weight may be disregarded as there is no sediment
   deposition service provided by a landscape without sinks.

7. Moves all of the service carriers one step either downhill (if
   overland) or downstream (if in a river or stream cell). This is a
   two-step process:

   1. If overland and in a non-floodplain sink location whose overland
      sink capacity bucket is not already full of sediment from
      previous carriers, reduces the carrier's actual weight by the
      remaining overland sink capacity and reduces the remaining
      overland sink capacity by the amount of sediment absorbed.
      Records the amount absorbed by this sink in the carrier's sink
      effects list.

      If in a river or stream location that contains a floodplain sink
      capacity bucket that is not already full, reduces the carrier's
      actual weight by the remaining floodplain sink capacity and
      reduces the remaining floodplain sink capacity by the amount of
      sediment absorbed. Records the amount absorbed by this sink in
      the carrier's sink effects list. Stores a new sediment carrier
      on this location with possible and actual weight values equal to
      the amount of sediment absorbed by this location divided by the
      hectares per cell value (to translate them back into densities
      for comparison with the input matrices).

   2. Moves to the neighboring cell with the lowest elevation,
      excluding the previous cell from which the carrier just came (to
      avoid short infinite cycles due to locally flat topography). If
      more than one neighboring cell meets this criteria, selects the
      one for which the angular distance is smallest between the
      current bearing and that required to reach this neighbor.
      Because this calculation cannot be performed on the matrix
      edges, any carrier which reaches an edge cell will be considered
      to have left the bounds of the study area.

8. Repeats step 7 until all service carriers have either gotten
   trapped in a single cell, flowed off the edge of the matrix bounds,
   or lost all of their actual weight to sinks.

9. Distributes the sediment captured in all floodplain sink capacity
   buckets (those placed at stream deposition locations) to their
   nearest floodplain sinks (as determined by step 2) according to
   their relative sink values (after multiplying by their floodplain
   activation factors). That is, floodplain sink locations with
   greater sink values (i.e., soil capture capacities) weighted by
   their floodplain activation factors receive correspondingly more of
   the sediment captured at the stream deposition locations.

10. If any of these floodplain sinks are co-located with a user, then
    service is considered to have been transmitted to that user.
    Otherwise, no service flow occurs at that location.

** Outputs

The sediment transport model produces theoretical, actual, and
inaccessible sediment sources, sinks, uses, and flows. All values are
in tons of sediment per hectare per time period of the simulation (one
year in the initial ARIES release).

* Flood Mitigation
** Overview

The flood mitigation SPAN model traces the path taken by runoff
downhill, downstream, and out into floodplains according to a digital
elevation model (DEM) and stream network data. The source matrix
represents the total amount of runoff in mm per cell expected to be
generated in each location over the time period of the simulation (one
year in the initial ARIES release). The sink matrix contains the
expected water absorption capacity of each cell (e.g., via
evapotranspiration and soil infiltration) in mm per cell. Finally, the
use matrix shows the spatial distribution of human populations or
assets that would be harmed by floodwater (as presence/absence
values). As carriers of floodwater move from cell to cell during the
simulation, their weight (the remaining runoff value) will be reduced
by encounters with sinks (but not users). Users in the path of
floodwater flows within floodplains will be affected by however much
floodwater reaches them. No other users will be harmed in this model.

** Procedure

1. The model first calculates the number of mm^2 per cell using the
   cell width and cell height in meters and multiplies this by the
   input source, sink, and use values to convert them from densities
   (mm) to volumes (mm^3).

2. Finds the nearest river or stream cell to each sink and user in a
   floodplain using a Euclidean distance metric. In cases of low
   resolution input data, some sinks or users may appear to be
   co-located with river or stream cells, in which case this will be
   considered the nearest one to them. Multiple sinks and users may
   share the same nearest river or stream cell. If there is a levee
   between a floodplain sink or user and its nearest river or stream
   cell, the sink will be considered nullified and the user will be
   considered fully protected by the levee's water-channeling effect.
   This information is meant to identify the river or stream locations
   from which floodwater emerges into floodplains during flooding
   events, when it can harm users.

3. Calculates the relative position of each non-levee-blocked
   floodplain sink and user along a line between its nearest river or
   stream point and the floodplain boundary. This position value is a
   real number between 0 and 1, where 0 indicates the distant
   floodplain boundary and 1 indicates the river or stream point.
   These values are called the *floodplain activation factors* and
   indicate each sink's relative likelihood of capturing floodwater
   and each user's relative likelihood of being inundated.

4. Places a virtual bucket at each sink point not in a floodplain,
   whose capacity is the sink volume (in mm^3 of water) at that
   location. This is called the *overland sink capacity*.

5. Places a virtual bucket at each floodwater emergence point detected
   in step 2, whose capacities are equal to the sum of all the
   non-levee-blocked floodplain sink volumes in their nearest sink
   locations (as determined by step 2) times their respective
   floodplain activation factors (step 3). This is called the
   *floodplain sink capacity*.

6. Creates one floodwater service carrier per source cell and sets its
   initial possible and actual weights to the source volume at that
   location.

7. Moves all of the service carriers one step either downhill (if
   overland) or downstream (if in a river or stream cell). This is a
   two-step process:

   1. If overland and in a non-floodplain sink location whose overland
      sink capacity bucket is not already full of runoff from previous
      carriers, reduces the carrier's actual weight by the remaining
      overland sink capacity and reduces the remaining overland sink
      capacity by the amount of runoff absorbed. Records the amount
      absorbed by this sink in the carrier's sink effects list.

      If in a river or stream location that contains a floodplain sink
      capacity bucket that is not already full, reduces the carrier's
      actual weight by the remaining floodplain sink capacity and
      reduces the remaining floodplain sink capacity by the amount of
      floodwater absorbed. Records the amount absorbed by this sink in
      the carrier's sink effects list.

      If in a river or stream location that is the nearest such point
      to one or more users (as determined by step 2), stores a new
      floodwater carrier on this location with possible and actual
      weight values equal to the amount of floodwater reaching this
      location (before local floodplain sink effects are applied)
      divided by the mm^2 per cell value (to translate them back into
      densities for comparison with the input matrices).

   2. Moves to the neighboring cell with the lowest elevation,
      excluding the previous cell from which the carrier just came (to
      avoid short infinite cycles due to locally flat topography). If
      more than one neighboring cell meets this criteria, selects the
      one for which the angular distance is smallest between the
      current bearing and that required to reach this neighbor.
      Because this calculation cannot be performed on the matrix
      edges, any carrier which reaches an edge cell will be considered
      to have left the bounds of the study area.

8. Repeats step 7 until all service carriers have either gotten
   trapped in a single cell or flowed off the edge of the matrix
   bounds.

9. Distributes the floodwater from the carriers stored in step 7.1
   (those placed at river or stream locations nearest to users) to
   their nearest floodplain users (as determined by step 2) according
   to their floodplain activation factors (from step 3). That is,
   floodplain use locations with greater floodplain activation factors
   (i.e., nearer to the river or stream within the floodplain) are
   inundated by correspondingly more of the floodwater passing through
   these locations.

** Outputs

The flood mitigation model produces theoretical, possible, actual,
inaccessible, and blocked floodwater sources, sinks, uses, and flows.
All values are in mm of water per cell per time period of the
simulation (one year in the initial ARIES release).

* Subsistence Fisheries
** Overview

The subsistence fisheries model simulates the nearshore, rival fishing
behavior of non-commercial fishermen located near to a large body of
water. Source points record the amount of fish available in kg over
the time period of the simulation (one year in the initial ARIES
release). Use points locate fishermen on the map and assign them
individual demand values in the same units as the source values. Paths
and trails are mapped to connect fishermen to their nearest viable
fishing grounds.

** Procedure

1. The model first calculates the number of km^2 per cell using the
   cell width and cell height in meters and multiplies this by the
   input source and use values to convert them from densities
   (kg/km^2) to volumes (kg).

2. Sets up source caches at all source points, recording the fish
   supply at those locations in kg.

3. Finds the nearest path cell to each user and follows this path
   towards the shore until the nearest source cell (i.e., water
   location containing fish) is encountered. This marks the entrance
   to this user's fishing grounds.

4. Sends each fisherman into the water at their fishing ground
   entrance and starts them fishing simultaneously, depleting the
   local source caches in the process. Since the fish being caught are
   a rival resource, their acquisition by one fisherman prevents
   further fishermen from using them.

5. If a location does not contain enough fish to meet a fisherman's
   demand, it proceeds to fish in each neighboring water cell until
   either its demand has been met or all cells within the maximum
   fishing range (5km in the initial ARIES release) of the initial
   fishing point have been exhausted. This is meant to bound the
   fishing area to a reasonable distance beyond which subsistence
   fishermen are unlikely to travel. This range may be varied for
   different subsistence fishing conditions.

6. Runs the simulation until all fishermen have either acquired their
   use value in fish (i.e., met their demand) or exhausted the source
   caches within their fishing grounds.

7. Records flow paths along footpaths from the use points to their
   fishing grounds entrances, which contain the total amount of fish
   caught by each fisherman in kg/km^2 (translated to a density for
   comparison with the input source and use values). Records flow
   values in each water cell equal to the amount of fish caught in
   that location by any fisherman.

** Outputs

The subsistence fisheries model produces theoretical, actual, and
inaccessible sources, uses, and flows. All values are in kg/km^2 of
fish per time period of the simulation (one year in the initial ARIES
release).

* Proximity to Open Spaces
** Overview

The proximity to open spaces model assesses the footpath accessibility
of natural open spaces (e.g., parks, fields, water bodies) to
residential houses or other properties in crowded urban areas. Sources
locations (open spaces) are ranked in abstract units from 0-100 in
terms of their expected appeal to visitors. Use points identify
buildings whose property values could benefit from access to nearby
open spaces. Because this ecosystem service flows along walking paths
between the source and use points, sink values rank the degree to
which intermediate locations along these paths reduce the appeal of
these routes to users. For example, if a property has a short path to
a park that crosses a highway or passes through a dangerous
neighborhood, the value of the nearby park to this property's value
may be decreased.

** Procedure

1. The model first constructs a service carrier at each source point
   with initial possible and actual weights equal to the source value
   at that location (from 0-100).

2. If the source location is also a sink, subtracts its sink value
   from the carrier's actual weight. The sink's ability to affect
   other carriers that pass through it is unaffected by this.

3. If the source location is also a use point (due to low-resolution
   inputs causing open space and a building to appear to be
   co-located), stores a service carrier on this location with the
   post-sink possible weight, actual weight, and sink effects.

4. If its remaining actual weight is above the transition threshold,
   splits the initial service carrier into one carrier per neighboring
   cell and moves these child carriers into those locations, each
   tracking a different route from the source location. The parent
   carrier is then removed from the simulation.

5. Reduces each of the child carriers' possible and actual weights by
   the distance decay along the path taken from the source point.

6. Each of these carriers again checks for the presence of sinks and
   users in its new location, losing actual weight to sinks and/or
   storing carriers on use locations (as in steps 2 and 3 above).

7. Expands the frontier (i.e., bounding box of cells on the grid)
   around all of the remaining carriers (those with distance-decayed
   possible weights above the transition threshold) by creating one
   carrier per cell in the frontier. Each such carrier chooses as its
   parent the adjacent carrier from the previous frontier with the
   greatest actual weight. Multiple carriers can share the same
   parent.

8. Reduces each of the new frontier carriers' possible and actual
   weights by the distance decay along the path taken from the source
   point (determined by their chosen parent carrier).

9. Continues to expand the frontier around each source point until
   distance decay drives the possible weights of all service carriers
   below the transition threshold.

file:./source-decay-proximity.png

Fig 1. Source Decay: Reduce from 100% to 25% over first 1/2 mile. Then
reduce from 25% to 0% over the next 1/2 mile.

** Outputs

The proximity to open spaces model produces theoretical, possible,
actual, inaccessible, and blocked sources, sinks, uses, and flows.
While the input source, sink, and use data were in relative values
from 0-100, the flow model outputs can have much higher values. The
reason for this is that the service medium moving between locations is
predominantly an informational and aesthetic service provided to
people along footpaths to open space locations. As a result, if many
users all have a path to the same open space, they can all benefit
from this location without competing with one another.

As an aside, the aesthetic service provided by source locations, while
non-rival, is potentially congestible (i.e., too many users in the
same open space will eventually crowd it out to the point that its
value is reduced). However, for the purposes of this model, this
problem is simplified somewhat by ignoring the effects of
congestibility. Future improvements to the algorithm will seek to take
this issue into account.

Since at best each source location could potentially provide fully
unobstructed, undecayed access to every user, the theoretical source
matrix contains the input source values (from 0-100) times the number
of use locations.

Since each sink could at worst impact every footpath once, the
theoretical sink matrix contains the input sink values (from 0-100)
times the number of footpaths possible (i.e., the number of source
point-use point pairs).

Finally, since each user could at best have a fully unobstructed,
undecayed path to every source point, the theoretical use map contains
the sum of all the input source values (each from 0-100) assigned
uniformly to every use location.

The most interesting outputs from this model are most likely to be the
possible and actual source, use, and flow matrices as well as the
actual and inaccessible sinks.

* Coastal Storm Protection
** Overview

The coastal storm protection model recreates the movement of an
historical storm by tracing its storm track from a fixed distance
offshore until it encounters vulnerable lives or assets. The service
medium in this model is the energy of a storm surge, measured in its
height above sea level in meters. The source of the storm surge is
chosen as a point along its historical storm track at a given distance
from land and its source value is the storm surge height at that
location. Sinks, which reduce the storm surge height as it moves, are
both marine features (e.g., bathymetric slope, coral reefs, islands)
and terrestrial characteristics (e.g. mangroves, dunes, vegetation,
slope). Users are economic assets or lives at risk due to storm surge
damage.

** Procedure

For a given historical storm, the model:

1. Finds the point along its storm track that is at /initial offshore
   distance/ from land (100km in the initial ARIES release).

2. Determines the direction that the storm is heading toward users by
   first calculating the mean bearing between the storm source point
   and all use locations. Then selects the neighboring storm track
   cell for which the angular distance is smallest between the mean
   bearing to users and that required to reach this neighbor. Because
   this calculation cannot be performed on the matrix edges, if a
   storm's source point begins on the edge, this simulation will be
   terminated immediately.

3. Calculates the number of m^2 per cell using the cell width and cell
   height in meters and multiplies this by the sink values and
   transition threshold to convert them from densities (m) to volumes
   (m^3).

4. Projects a line of carriers perpendicular to the storm direction
   that is /storm surge width/ wide (100km in the initial ARIES
   release). Each carrier's possible and actual weights are set to a
   volume of water (in m^3) equal to the source point's value (i.e.,
   storm surge height in meters) times the area (in m^2) covered by
   projecting a line of cells behind it to a distance of /storm surge
   depth/ (5km in the initial ARIES release). These carriers represent
   the energy of the storm surge.

5. Traces the storm track backwards from the source point up to a
   distance of half the /max sample window size/ (10km in the initial
   ARIES release) and then traces it forwards for the distance reached
   backwards. This constructs a sample storm track window centered on
   the source point.

6. Calculates the mean bearing along the sample storm track window.

7. Moves the storm surge toward the coast by advancing the carriers in
   parallel with the storm surge centerpoint (the location which
   follows the storm track directly). To do this, the model:

   1. Shifts the sample storm track window forward one step,
      recalculating its mean bearing. If the leading edge of the
      window reaches the end of the storm track, shrinks the window
      from the trailing edge so that it remains centered on the storm
      centerpoint.

   2. Calculates the angular rotation between the current storm track
      bearing and the new mean bearing of the shifted sample storm
      track window. This determines how much and in what direction the
      storm is turning as is progresses along its historical storm
      track.

   3. For each storm surge carrier, the model:

      1. Projects a line of cells from the carrier's current location
         to where it will be after the storm surge shifts forward and
         rotates (from step 7.2).

      2. Moves the carrier through each of the intermediate cells
         identified in the previous step, reducing its possible and
         actual weights by any sink values it encounters along the
         way.

         In this model, both possible and actual weights are reduced
         by geomorphic features (e.g., bathymetric slope, dunes,
         island topography) as altering these landscape elements is
         largely beyond the ability of policy makers. Actual weights
         are further reduced by ecological features (e.g., coral
         reefs, mangroves, seagrass, terrestrial vegetation) as these
         can be directly affected by human activities.

         If at any point the carrier's possible weight falls below the
         transition threshold or it reaches the matrix edge, it is
         removed from the simulation, and its remaining weight is
         lost.

      3. Stores a carrier on any use location encountered with
         possible and actual weights equal to their values before
         local sink effects are applied divided by the m^2 per cell
         value (to translate them back into densities for comparison
         with the input matrices).

8. Repeats step 7 until either all of the carriers' possible weights
   have fallen below the transition threshold or the end of the storm
   track is reached.

** Outputs

The coastal storm protection model produces theoretical, possible,
actual, inaccessible, and blocked sources, sinks, uses, and flows for
one historical storm track. All values are in meters of storm surge
height above sea level.
